Add responses to reviewers (#92)
greenelab/iscb-diversity-manuscript: content/response-to-reviewers.md

> 
> There have been quite a lot of discussion on the methodological weakness of this paper  following its release on bioRxiv. The Race and Ethnicity chapter was particularly controversial, for example mixing it with religious terms was clearly an important error. Therefore, even if interesting, the technology proposed in the paper has still to mature to produce reliable results.

> We agree with the reviewer that the names of the groups of countries are not appropriate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We agree with the reviewer that the names of the groups of countries were not appropriate as some were by country, some were by region, and others were by religion.
```

> In this revision, we have selected more appropriate names for the country grouping to avoid confusion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this revision, we have retained the data-driven groupings but selected more appropriate names for the name origin groups.
```

Author: I like this!

> Importantly, to complement the existing analysis, we performed an affiliation analysis to detect countries of affiliation for authors and honorees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Importantly, to complement the existing analysis, we performed an analysis of author affiliations to detect the affiliated countries for authors and honorees.
```

> This is a major improvement of the study because, while examining a different component (affiliation vs. name origin and race/ethnicity), we were able to alleviate biases in the prediction models and analyze the composition of author/honoree affiliation at the country level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a major improvement of the study because, in the past work an author's affiliation and name origin have some chance of being interlinked.
Now we can directly examine geographic discrepancies.
Within best represented country (the US), we can also examine differences by name origin to remove the geographic confounder.
We find that both components (geography and name origin) still play a role.
```

We agree that the lack of diversity has been readily apparent for some time.

> While the paper's corresponding author curated the list of honorees in 2018 and shared the issues with ISCB board of directors members, we did not observe any changes for 2019 despite these private attempts to influence diversity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our paper's corresponding author curated the list of honorees in 2018 and shared the issues with ISCB board of directors members, but we did not observe any changes for 2019 despite these private attempts to influence diversity.
```

> Since our paper's release, ISCB has released the 2020 set of Fellows: https://www.iscb.org/iscb-fellows, which is 2x larger than most years and includes two scientists with affiliations in Asia including the first ever with an affiliation in China.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since our paper's release, ISCB has released the [2020 set of Fellows](https://www.iscb.org/iscb-fellows), which is two times larger than most years and includes two scientists with affiliations in Asia including the first ever with an affiliation in China.
```

> The Award Winners also seem more diverse than past years: https://www.iscb.org/iscb-news-items/4249-2020-feb14-iscb-congratulates-2020-award-winners.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [Award Winners](https://www.iscb.org/iscb-news-items/4249-2020-feb14-iscb-congratulates-2020-award-winners) also seem more diverse than past years.
```

Now that this paper exists, changes have begun to appear.

Our new affiliation analysis helps address the other points related to geographic disparities.
Please see discussion at <https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity-manuscript/issues/42>.

> In summary, at the scientific level the problem of normalizing names in terms of gender and origin is interesting and even if this paper makes some progress it is still not sufficient for a publication. As an opinion paper, the topic is obviously relevant and the conclusions known (gender balance is difficult and other biases are even more challenging) but the selection of the background (published papers in three bioinformatics journals) is misleading respect to the goal, i.e. selection of speakers and awardees, that is based on other criteria.

While diversity and parity is difficult to achieve in a short period of time, we strongly believe that acknowledging these disparities is an important first step toward justly recognizing contributions from minoritized scientists.
Our study does just that.

> Now that changes have started to appear in the field of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, we hope to see similar trend beyond the field and that minoritized scientists contribution will be properly recognized in the long term.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that changes have started to appear in the field of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, we hope to see similar trend beyond the field and that minoritized scientists' contributions will be properly recognized in the long term.
```

> I would have certainly benefited by understanding a basis for this classification.
> Even in "Nameprism" that the authors cite, the basis is unclear.

We agree with the reviewer that the names of the groups of countries are not appropriate.
In this revision, we have selected more appropriate names for the country grouping to avoid confusion.

> Importantly, to complement the existing analysis, we performed an affiliation analysis to detect countries of affiliation for authors and honorees.

Reviewer: Check this vs the language I used above and see what you prefer.

> p. 4, paragraph 2: It would be great to see citations for Genderize, especially ones that provide insights on accuracy/reliability.  It would also be nice to know how inclusive this app is in terms of names from across the world.  Without that, the 1578 missing forenames could be biased by any bias in this app.  This discussion is had with respect to wru lower down on the page, so it's natural to provide this standard here.

In the revised manuscript, we have added two citations for genderize.io regarding its accuracy and bias:

> ""

Reviewer 2: Is this a placeholder? If so, add `TODO` since that is easy to search for

> 
> This topic is out of scope for the proceedings of ISMB, at least by how I interpret the scope. It has its place in the published literature (I recommend with major revisions), but there is no methodology for or the analysis of molecular and biological data. Instead it is a study about the authors of such papers and broadly speaking it characterizes the recognition and reward system for their contributions to the field.

Discussion at <https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity-manuscript/issues/58>

> 

Reviewer 2: We don't want to link to issue? I feel like if we have an issue we might as well link in case readers want to comment more on the point.

Author: I thought this comment was irrelevant but OK I can add back in.

> 
> This topic is out of scope for the proceedings of ISMB, at least by how I interpret the scope. It has its place in the published literature (I recommend with major revisions), but there is no methodology for or the analysis of molecular and biological data. Instead it is a study about the authors of such papers and broadly speaking it characterizes the recognition and reward system for their contributions to the field.

> This comment is irrelevant to other future venues for submission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We appreciate the reviewer's perspective.
We felt that this work, as it focused on ISCB, was appropriate for submission as a general computational biology manuscript.
However, it is clear that the reviewers and session organizers felt differently, so we are pursuing other venues to disseminate the work.
```

> 
> * Although results might appear simple, substantial work has been completed.

We appreciate the reviewer's positive feedback on our work.
We strongly believe that acknowledging these disparities is an important first step toward justly recognizing contributions from minoritized scientists.
This is the goal of the study.

> Comments on the analysis:
> \* The analysis focuses on ISCB, its fellows and its conferences. ISCB conferences are listed at: https://www.iscb.org/iscb-conferences however, justification was not provided as to why some conferences made it and others did not. PSB for example was assessed as international but this is hard to justify given its location patterns. GIW/ISCB-Asia is omitted, but no justification was given. This is of course of significant importance for the conclusions. Either justification or expanded analysis is needed.
>

> >> \* Related to above, the selected journals for the background are of global reach (especially Bioinformatics because of rankings and $0 closed-access publication charges) whereas selected ISCB conferences (with their honorees) are more localized in Europe and North America for financial reasons. Considering the field as a whole, there are conferences that are limited to Asia, such as APBC or ISCB-Asia/Genome Informatics Workshop that are both of good quality and well known. APBC 2020 web site also shows that BMC Bioinformatics is among journals for their special issue. This suggests that the journals indeed better represent the field and that conferences are more geographically fragmented, including potentially ISCB conferences. This in turn means that the selection of conferences is critical for the outcome and appropriateness of this analysis. I think it would be appropriate to see a recognition of this fact in the manuscript and adjust the analysis.

Reviewer 2: why double `>>`

Author: typo that's why

Discussion at <https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity-manuscript/issues/61>

> \* Related to above, the selected journals for the background are of global reach (especially Bioinformatics because of rankings and $0 closed-access publication charges) whereas selected ISCB conferences (with their honorees) are more localized in Europe and North America for financial reasons. Considering the field as a whole, there are conferences that are limited to Asia, such as APBC or ISCB-Asia/Genome Informatics Workshop that are both of good quality and well known. APBC 2020 web site also shows that BMC Bioinformatics is among journals for their special issue. This suggests that the journals indeed better represent the field and that conferences are more geographically fragmented, including potentially ISCB conferences. This in turn means that the selection of conferences is critical for the outcome and appropriateness of this analysis. I think it would be appropriate to see a recognition of this fact in the manuscript and adjust the analysis.

Discussion at <https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity-manuscript/issues/62>

> 

Reviewer 2: This whole paragraph got moved up?

Author: Yes. These two points that the reviewer made are really one point, so I thought pointing them to one issue where we had the primary discussion is sufficient. I did refer #60 to #62.

We agree with the reviewer that the names of the groups of countries are not appropriate.
In this revision, we have selected more appropriate names for the country grouping to avoid confusion.
Importantly, to complement the existing analysis, we performed an affiliation analysis to detect countries of affiliation for authors and honorees.
This is a major improvement of the study because, while examining a different component (affiliation vs. name origin and race/ethnicity), we were able to alleviate biases in the prediction models and analyze the composition of author/honoree affiliation at the country level.

> By integrating different methods we hope to mitigate the existing biases and discover insightful findings that correctly reflect the current representation diversity at conferences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

We don't think it is accurate to characterize our work as an attempt to "promote sensitivities."
Instead, we think it would be more appropriate to describe the work as an effort to examine the patterns that underlie who is and who isn't being honored by the field's major international society.
By integrating different methods we hope to mitigate the existing biases and discover insightful findings that correctly reflect the current representation diversity at conferences.
```

This is a major improvement of the study because, while examining a different component (affiliation vs. name origin and race/ethnicity), we were able to alleviate biases in the prediction models and analyze the composition of author/honoree affiliation at the country level.
We also limit our race/ethnicity analysis to only US-affiliated scientists to avoid further biases.

Please see discussion at <https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity-manuscript/issues/71>.

> Given this small pool of 411, some names of which were duplicated (fellows and keynotes etc), were they manually checked for accuracy.

We did not manually check names and photos to guess gender or name origins to avoid inducing bias.
Please see discussion at <https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity-manuscript/issues/72>.

> There are non-random missing data. European Spanish/Portuguese/Italian are called Hispanic. Assignment of the race (white/black/Asian) based surname is difficult to extrapolate to a multi-cultural society where last name and skin color are maybe discordant.

> We acknowledged that our supervised learning approaches are neither error free nor bias free.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We acknowledged that our supervised learning approaches are neither error free nor bias free.
We would also note that it would be a mistake to consider race equivalent to skin color: race, as analyzed in this study, is based on self-identification and is a complex topic with its own area of research.
```
Not sure that this is quite the right wording but I feel we should push back a bit on this skin color == race perspective that's coming through here.
